Let's take a closer look at some of the established architectures we can choose from and see the benefits
of MVC.
Several different approaches are possible when making a unity game as part of an exploration on this
topic.
I created a simple three D unity bowling game from scratch using six different styles, each style focused
on a particular architecture.
We see some of them listed here.
Starting from the top, it's more of what feels natural to a beginning developer.
I call this the no architecture approach, and the flavor you see in unity is when you put code local
to the three D object it relates to.
So you'd put bowling ball code on the bowling ball, you'd put pin code on the pin when learning unity.
This feels like a natural way to do it.
One of the problems that arises is how do you get those different three D objects with their separate
code to talk well together?
Moving forward, probably someone with a little bit more experience would realize that having most of
their code off on a separate empty game object somewhere with references to the pins and references
to the bowling ball would be a next step up.
This smooths out some of the communication because that empty go or empty game object can facilitate
a possible problem.
Here with this is that that empty game object doesn't know the exact lifecycle of each of the objects.
It may have problems starting up the world, pausing and pausing gameplay and knowing when elements
have been destroyed.
A veteran developer or small team making this game may try a custom architecture.
They'll use the good design principles and design patterns that they've learned and apply them to some
custom solution.
In my experience, the majority of teams sit here using custom architectures.
The benefits are that it's very flexible.
It does require a lot more knowledge and experience to be able to create such a solution.
And problems that arise there include that you're reinventing the wheel for every project.
Fair enough.
That we'll is customized to each solution, but if you're maintaining multiple projects, it can be
a bit more difficult to step in and out of each one of them.
Also, when hiring new staff, you need to educate them on your particular flavor of architectural solution
per project.
Finally, there's using an established solution.
Taking a solution off the shelf and applying it to the project has a lot of benefits.
We know it's been proven.
We know it's built on top of principles and patterns that work.
However, it is less flexible and can be seen as verbose, maybe needing to add multiple classes or
quite a bit of code to accomplish simple things, especially in the early days of development.
Also, each member of your team and anybody new that joins needs to know that particular framework.
Now, in one way that's easier because there's existing materials.
They may already have the skills for a particular established framework that you choose, but that learning
curve is notable.
Now after decades of software development, many of the architectures that we see today have stood the
test of time.
Some very popular ones include breaking the core functionality into three or four separate pieces and
having those pieces communicate.
The general idea is that each of them solves challenges that have specific needs, so it makes sense
to group them some of the established architectures we know about our model view presenter Model, view,
view, model and model view controller or MVC model View presenter organizes the code into three distinct
units.
The presenter sits in the middle and organizes and coordinates the other tiers.
In this case, the presenter receives input from the user.
Primarily, the presenter will coordinate the rendering out with the view.
And when you have a high amount of user interaction and frequently updated views, this is one great
solution.
The model view view model is quite similar.
It's separated into three concerns or three areas of code, and here the view model sits in the middle.
The view model handles the input and coordinate the rendering with the view.
And it's also ideal when there's user interaction and frequent updates to the View.
And MVC looks quite similar.
Here we have a controller as the middle object.
In strict MVC, it's the controller that handles the input.
It coordinates pulling data from the model, passing on what is needed to render out the view.
And it's ideal when you have multiple models and multiple views to coordinate that complexity.
Ultimately, this set of established architectures are quite similar.
They all seek out to separate the concerns of your project to help improve the overall quality of life
while working and maintaining on the project.
Quite crucially, they separate out the UI or view from the data.
Now the differences here are quite subtle.
Of course we have the naming is a bit different, but also the behaviours which we'd only really see
at the implementation level are unique to each of them as well.
For now, let's take a deeper look at MVC.
We'll choose that as our favorite of these patterns and move forward.
Model View Controller is an architecture that separates your code out into those three primary concerns.
To recap, the model handles the runtime data, the view handles the UI and the input from the user.
Also rendering out audio visuals to the user as well.
And the controller is the glue.
It sits between everything, coordinates things and has the high level game logic.
Now, special note here is that MVC typically has the controller manage the input from the user.
In my approach with MVC and many others that use unity, we have the view handle the input.
That's a subtle difference that has to do with how unity relates with input in a traditional sense.
Often we think of the view being mono behaviors, monitor behaviors, help handle input, so it's a
good fit.
So a slight variation here is that we'll have the view, handle the input and pass that on to the controller
to actually process and decide what that means.
Today's modern games are often connected to back end services or even multiplayer with other players
live.
This introduces a service layer.
So let's take what we've discussed with MVC and add one more layer, a dedicated service layer that
will deal with external data that's different than the model.
Now, during the rest of the course, I may use MVC and MVCs interchangeably.
I mean them to be the same solution, the same basic plan with maybe there's a service layer or maybe
there's not.
Depending if your game needs it, you can consider that layer optional.
Overall, using an MVC established architecture has many features and benefits.
Established architectures are proven built on those principles and patterns we've seen with success.
They're language agnostic, so in theory you could port them to different languages and platforms if
your workload expands to different technologies.
Now, while there is a learning curve, ultimately using an architecture like this leads to faster development.
And because we've seen the gross majority of the lifespan of a project is spent in maintenance, we
will really be able to do that maintenance more quickly and more efficiently within architecture.
Furthermore, an MVCs project is more readable, more testable, more decoupled in how these different
concerns communicate.
We have that dedicated service layer if we need it on our project, which quite often we do, and there's
workflow benefits as well as our projects all sit on version control and we collaborate by committing
to version control, we'll see less friction of commits when we use an established architecture purely
because it separates our code base out into smaller snippets, and that means that there's less probability
of conflicts.
Now it's worth noting that there is healthy debate, particularly in game development and the unity
community, against using something like MVC.
A few popular arguments are that it's too rigid, that this is challenging to follow and apply and have
the discipline into your project.
Now, a response in defense of MVC is that that learning curve is worth the effort.
Furthermore, I mentioned that in the mind of developers, we often think that life is all about adding
features and we forget that real significant stage of maintenance.
So here it may feel easier to use something else, but MVC ultimately creates better workflow.
Another argument is that unity itself doesn't feature data binding, and without data binding, we can't
establish the patterns of architecture that are meant for MVC.
While certainly using data binding can make it easier to apply this, there's alternative solutions
and we'll see some of those.
In particular, the observable class which I talked about in an earlier section, is how we're going
to solve that within our architecture.
Here we get something like binding pretty easy off the shelf.
Another comment is that because the communication is decoupled and passes through more steps that using
an established architecture like MVC is not optimized.
And we know that gaming is a type of software that needs optimization.
I could not agree more with this assessment.
However, I would say that the bulk of your work as a team is not necessarily on the narrow parts of
capturing input and rendering graphics.
One simple way to address this is to have the larger metagame of your menus, your social features,
high score tables, inventory management, all the complexity to UI have that sit within an established
framework and your core gameplay which needs the benefits of a highly optimized pipeline that could
sit outside of MVC communicating in a more coupled and more quick fashion.
That's an excellent hybrid solution.
And finally, there's a criticism that using an established architecture means that every new button
you add that you have to wire up, it's too verbose, there's too many steps involved, too many classes.
Crisis to create.
We'll see a little bit more on that in a future slide.
I'd say that's true.
You need to have around four or five steps instead of two or three steps to wire UI into your game.
In that specific example, especially in the beginning, doing a couple extra steps can feel tedious,
but ultimately this is a symptom of the benefit of separating your concerns out.
During the initial 20% of adding features.
You will feel this and it takes some getting used to, but the benefits really apply to that larger
80% of maintaining that code base.
Now that things are laid out quite separately, you'll find that refactor does happen with more confidence.
Bugs are less likely to occur and when they occur, solving them is more easy and straightforward.
Some reference links will be included here.
If you want to learn a bit more about the perspective, you can take a look and I encourage you to do
so.
Overall, each software development tool has pros and cons.
I demonstrate in this course that learning and established architecture like MVC has benefits that outweigh
those drawbacks.
Let's learn more and VC's starts with the separation of concerns.
Let's recap.
The model handles the runtime data, the controller sits in the middle and coordinates communication.
It also contains most of the game logic.
The view handles the UI and input from the user, as well as rendering out graphics and audio.
And the service layer handles any external data calls.
For example, if your game collaborates with a back end system for submitting high scores, the conventions
of using MVCs are to be vigilant with the references and communication between your concerns.
You want to keep those concerns separate.
The idea is that each concern is basically meant to do very different things.
And so you want to isolate those changes.
Take a look at this communication table.
There's a lot of information there, but the main takeaway is that the controller sends and receives
most of the communication.
We want the model to be pretty dumb knowing only about data stuff.
We want the view itself to be pretty dumb handling only UI and input stuff.
The fact that they don't openly communicate directly with each other is a plus.
And for most communications we see that the service behaves like the model.
It too is meant to be dumb and handle just its own data.
Now, when getting new into one of these now, when beginning to learn any established architecture
like MVCs and VCs offers some flexibility in how you communicate with the different concerns.
A first reaction when people are getting into an established framework is, Wow, it's verbose.
I need to do quite a bit of steps in order to accomplish something as simple as a UI button.
Click.
Let's see the range of complexity here first.
If we had a no architecture approach and we were not using MVCs, how would we listen to a button?
Imagine if we have a click the button game and by clicking the button the text updates to you win.
This is a very simple game.
We could get away with two steps to the process.
Assuming we're using Unity UI, we would listen to the on click event on that UI and we would handle
that with some custom code.
That's two steps.
Now using an established architecture like MVCs, we see that it's going to take some more steps.
This is because these concerns have been separated out in the most verbose flavor.
We'll see about five steps to handle that button.
Click.
That's the view button sending out a message, the controller handling it, updating the model, the
model passing out a message.
Hey, I've been updated and the view getting that information so that it can update the view itself.
You'll also see in this list I interchange whether an event is used or a command.
That distinction will see a bit more in the code.
Ultimately, what I'd recommend to teams is to choose one of these flavors and just go with it.
For example, consistently applying the number five for the beginning of your development, get a feel
for that.
If you do want to shorten the process from 5 to 4 or some other amount of steps, that's up to you to
decide.
But remember being consistent in your approach and more decoupled in your approach pays dividends.
Now, it can be a little confusing that we have some parts of this process are prescriptive that we
must follow, and there's also flexibility like these different choices.
As you're getting used to using MVCs, I'd say don't worry too much about getting it perfect.
It's all a learning process and along the way you'll see which flavor works best for you.
Another bonus about this is later in the project.
If you decide that you want to change your approach, it's going to be much easier to refactor within
MVCs than prior.
Even if you have some subtle differences to how you've applied it, the patterns themselves provide
a consistency that was maybe missing from your previous approaches for the purposes of our discussion.
We're going to elect the MVC or MVC as our favorite framework to move forward and see how this applies
to unity to get a good feel for it.
So let's choose a framework as part of research For this course, I looked at a lot of different unity
approaches.
Some of them live in a description in a blog post from a development team, but don't have any code
that we can get and hang on to.
However, there are many bespoke, established architectures that we can take advantage of specifically
for unity.
Some of the ones that I used and played with are here.
If, after completing this entire course you want to go back and try one of these frameworks, I invite
you to do that.
The principles will learn in the rest of the course here we'll apply to whatever MVC approach you'd
like to do.
Two of them on the list I created here myself.
The You MVC is by RC I created years ago and the mini MVCs I created just for the purposes of this course.
And we'll learn much more about how and why I recommend that.
Now a special note about why MVC solutions need to be massaged a bit when you bring them into the unity
world is that unity already has a bespoke structure.
We talked a little bit about that in an earlier section.
That unity is based on scenes and game objects and that there's a way that the communication between
components and game objects happens with inside Unity.
It's important to note that unity itself is not built on an MVC structure.
Unity has areas of concern that collapse these three into one area.
For example, probably the single most important class that you'll utilize in any unity project is mono
behavior.
Particularly as a beginning developer.
Everything you do sits on a subclass of mono behavior.
Just using mono behavior and example, we can see that unity collapses.
Lots of different concerns there.
It behaves somewhat like a model having properties like enabled tag and transform.
It behaves something like a view doing all sorts of input loops and graphics rendering from withinside
the mono behavior lifecycle and it behaves something like a controller.
It has moments you can captur predictably for a Wake Start update many, many more.
It has the concept of serialized reference which helps you address and reach different concerns you
may have outside of the monarch behavior.
And as we go through the rest of the course and you see bringing MVC concepts into unity, this is something
to keep in mind.
Unity, like any specific platform, has unique features, and we have to bring these theoretical concepts
of architecture into the real world of unity.
Some resources you can take a look at here and they'll be linked below include the execution order of
all the different events amount of behavior has, and then of course, the documentation script reference
form on the behavior itself.
Now, as we're thinking of any architecture and bring it into unity, or if we're creating a custom
solution ourselves, there are some considerations.
Does the framework or architecture have unity specific features?
What's the role of monarch behaviors?
They're so important in the unity world, but come with some pros and cons.
Does the architecture use monarch behaviors?
How does the architecture handle different concerns and communication between those concerns?
And speaking of that, what's the level of rigidity versus flexibility overall?
In this section, we've got a lot of new info.
We've seen how the foundation of design principles and design patterns comes into the larger world of
architectures.
We've seen some of the unique challenges with bringing an established architecture into your team and
also some of the benefits as well.
And we've seen that unity, like any platform, has its own idiosyncrasies, its own specific features
and limitations and whatever architectural choice we want, we want it to fit well in the unity world.
That's it for now.
Thanks.